table partition: add INTERVAL partitioning (#9751)
pingcap/docs: partitioned-table.md

* You want to use a column that contains time or date values, or containing values arising from some other series.
* You need to frequently run queries on the columns used for partitioning. For example, when executing a query like `EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(*) FROM employees WHERE separated BETWEEN '2000-01-01' AND '2000-12-31' GROUP BY store_id;`, TiDB can quickly know that only the data in the `p2` partition needs to be scanned, because the other partitions do not match the `WHERE` condition.

### Range INTERVAL partitioning

> INTERVAL partitioning is introduced in TiDB v6.3 as syntactic sugar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
INTERVAL partitioning is introduced in TiDB v6.3.0 as syntactic sugar:
```

> INTERVAL partitioning is introduced in TiDB v6.3.0 as syntactic sugar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Range INTERVAL partitioning is an extension of Range partitioning, which allows you to create partitions of a specified interval easily. Starting from v6.3.0, INTERVAL partitioning is introduced in TiDB as syntactic sugar:
```

> 

Reviewer 2: To let users know better about this feature, could we also add a sentence to describe what Range INTERVAL partitioning is?

For example:

Range INTERVAL partitioning is an extension of Range partitioning, which allows you to create partitions of a specified interval. Starting from TiDB v6.3.0, INTERVAL partitioning is introduced as syntactic sugar:

Reviewer: Good idea. Updated.

```
PARTITION BY RANGE [COLUMNS] (<partitioning expression>)
INTERVAL (<interval expression>)
FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
[NULL PARTITION]
[MAXVALUE PARTITION]
```

> Example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```
CREATE TABLE employees (
    id int unsigned NOT NULL,
    fname varchar(30),
    lname varchar(30),
    hired date NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
    separated date DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
    job_code int,
    store_id int NOT NULL
) PARTITION BY RANGE (id)
INTERVAL (100) FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (100) LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (10000) MAXVALUE PARTITION
```

It creates the following table:

```
CREATE TABLE `employees` (
  `id` int unsigned NOT NULL,
  `fname` varchar(30) DEFAULT NULL,
  `lname` varchar(30) DEFAULT NULL,
  `hired` date NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
  `separated` date DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
  `job_code` int DEFAULT NULL,
  `store_id` int NOT NULL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (`id`)
(PARTITION `P_LT_100` VALUES LESS THAN (100),
 PARTITION `P_LT_200` VALUES LESS THAN (200),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_9900` VALUES LESS THAN (9900),
 PARTITION `P_LT_10000` VALUES LESS THAN (10000),
 PARTITION `P_MAXVALUE` VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE))
```

> It also works with RANGE COLUMNS partitioning:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
INTERVAL partitioning also works with RANGE COLUMNS partitioning. 

For example: 

```

Reviewer 2: There are three "it" in a row😂

```
CREATE TABLE monthly_report_status (
    report_id int NOT NULL,
    report_status varchar(20) NOT NULL,
    report_date date NOT NULL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS (report_date)
INTERVAL (1 MONTH) FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2000-01-01') LAST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2025-01-01')
```

It creates this table:

```
CREATE TABLE `monthly_report_status` (
  `report_id` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `report_status` varchar(20) NOT NULL,
  `report_date` date NOT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS(`report_date`)
(PARTITION `P_LT_2000-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-01-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2000-02-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-02-01'),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-11-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-11-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-12-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-12-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2025-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2025-01-01'))
```

> The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition where the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL` is placed. In the partitioning expression, `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition where the partitioning expression that evaluates to `NULL` is placed. In the partitioning expression, `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).
```

> The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition where the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL` is placed. In the partitioning expression, `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning].(#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition where the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL` is placed. In the partitioning expression, `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).
```

> The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition with the definition as `PARTITION P_NULL VALUES LESS THAN (<minimum value of the column type>)`, only matching when the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL`.See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning), which explains that `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition with the definition as `PARTITION P_NULL VALUES LESS THAN (<minimum value of the column type>)`, only matching when the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL`. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning), which explains that `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. 
```

The optional parameter `MAXVALUE PARTITION` creates a last partition as `PARTITION P_MAXVALUE VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)`.

#### ALTER INTERVAL Partitioned tables

> INTERVAL partitioning also adds simpler syntax for adding and dropping partitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
INTERVAL partitioning also adds simpler syntaxes for adding and dropping partitions.
```

> #### ALTER INTERVAL Partitioned tables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### ALTER INTERVAL partitioned tables
```

> The following statement changes the first partition. It drops all partitions whose values are lower than the given expression, and makes the matched partition the new first partition. It does not affect a NULL PARTITION.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following statement changes the first partition. It drops all partitions whose values are less than the given expression, and makes the matched partition the new first partition. It does not affect a NULL PARTITION.
```

```
ALTER TABLE table_name FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
```

> The following statement changes the last partition, meaning adding more partitions with higher ranges and room for new data. It will add new partitions with the current INTERVAL up to and including the given expression. It does not work if a `MAXVALUE PARTITION` exists, because it needs data reorganization.

Reviewer: "It will add new partitions with the current INTERVAL up to and including the given expression." This sentence is confusing. Need to rephrase it. @mjonss

```
ALTER TABLE table_name LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
```

> #### INTERVAL Partitioning details and limitations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### INTERVAL partitioning details and limitations
```

> - The INTERVAL partitioning feature is about `CREATE/ALTER TABLE` syntax only. There is no change in metadata, so tables created or altered with the new syntax are still MySQL-compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The INTERVAL partitioning feature only involves the `CREATE/ALTER TABLE` syntax. There is no change in metadata, so tables created or altered with the new syntax are still MySQL-compatible.
```

> - There is no change in the output format of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` to keep MySQL compatibility.
> - The new `ALTER` syntax applies to existing tables conforming to INTERVAL. They do not need to be created with `INTERVAL` syntax.
> - For `RANGE COLUMNS`, only integer, date and datetime column types are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There is no change in the output format of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` to keep MySQL compatibility.
- The new `ALTER` syntax applies to existing tables conforming to INTERVAL. You do not need to create these tables with the `INTERVAL` syntax.
- For `RANGE COLUMNS`, only integer, date and datetime column types are supported.
```

> - For `RANGE COLUMNS`, only integer, date and datetime column types are supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For `RANGE COLUMNS`, only integer, date, and datetime column types are supported.
```

    report_status varchar(20) NOT NULL,
    report_date date NOT NULL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS (report_date)
INTERVAL (1 MONTH) FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2000-01-01') LAST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2025-01-01')
```

It creates this table:

```
CREATE TABLE `monthly_report_status` (
  `report_id` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `report_status` varchar(20) NOT NULL,
  `report_date` date NOT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS(`report_date`)
(PARTITION `P_LT_2000-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-01-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2000-02-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-02-01'),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-11-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-11-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-12-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-12-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2025-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2025-01-01'))
```

The optional parameter `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition with the definition as `PARTITION P_NULL VALUES LESS THAN (<minimum value of the column type>)`, only matching when the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL`. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning), which explains that `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. 

> The optional parameter `MAXVALUE PARTITION` creates a last partition as `PARTITION P_MAXVALUE VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optional parameter `MAXVALUE PARTITION` creates the last partition as `PARTITION P_MAXVALUE VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)`.
```

FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
[NULL PARTITION]
[MAXVALUE PARTITION]
```

For example:

```
CREATE TABLE employees (
    id int unsigned NOT NULL,
    fname varchar(30),
    lname varchar(30),
    hired date NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
    separated date DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
    job_code int,
    store_id int NOT NULL
) PARTITION BY RANGE (id)
INTERVAL (100) FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (100) LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (10000) MAXVALUE PARTITION
```

It creates the following table:

```
CREATE TABLE `employees` (
  `id` int unsigned NOT NULL,
  `fname` varchar(30) DEFAULT NULL,
  `lname` varchar(30) DEFAULT NULL,
  `hired` date NOT NULL DEFAULT '1970-01-01',
  `separated` date DEFAULT '9999-12-31',
  `job_code` int DEFAULT NULL,
  `store_id` int NOT NULL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (`id`)
(PARTITION `P_LT_100` VALUES LESS THAN (100),
 PARTITION `P_LT_200` VALUES LESS THAN (200),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_9900` VALUES LESS THAN (9900),
 PARTITION `P_LT_10000` VALUES LESS THAN (10000),
 PARTITION `P_MAXVALUE` VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE))
```

INTERVAL partitioning also works with RANGE COLUMNS partitioning. 

For example: 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(PARTITION `P_LT_100` VALUES LESS THAN (100),
 PARTITION `P_LT_200` VALUES LESS THAN (200),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_9900` VALUES LESS THAN (9900),
 PARTITION `P_LT_10000` VALUES LESS THAN (10000),
 PARTITION `P_MAXVALUE` VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE))
```

It also works with RANGE COLUMNS partitioning:

```
CREATE TABLE monthly_report_status (
    report_id int NOT NULL,
    report_status varchar(20) NOT NULL,
    report_date date NOT NULL
)
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS (report_date)
INTERVAL (1 MONTH) FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2000-01-01') LAST PARTITION LESS THAN ('2025-01-01')
```

Which creates this table:

```
CREATE TABLE `monthly_report_status` (
  `report_id` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `report_status` varchar(20) NOT NULL,
  `report_date` date NOT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
PARTITION BY RANGE COLUMNS(`report_date`)
(PARTITION `P_LT_2000-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-01-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2000-02-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2000-02-01'),
...
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-11-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-11-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2024-12-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2024-12-01'),
 PARTITION `P_LT_2025-01-01` VALUES LESS THAN ('2025-01-01'))
```

> The optional NULL PARTITION would create a partition where the partitioning expression evaluates to NULL would be placed. In the partitioning expression, NULL is considered to be less than any other value, see [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional `NULL PARTITION` creates a partition where the partitioning expression evaluates to `NULL` is placed. In the partitioning expression, `NULL` is considered to be less than any other value. See [Handling of NULL with Range partitioning](#handling-of-null-with-range-partitioning).
```

> The optional MAXVALUE PARTITION would create a last partition as `PARTITION P_MAXVALUE VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional `MAXVALUE PARTITION` creates a last partition as `PARTITION P_MAXVALUE VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE)`
```

#### ALTER INTERVAL Partitioned tables

INTERVAL partitioning also adds simpler syntax for adding and dropping partitions.

> Changing the first partition, meaning dropping partitions with lower ranges/older data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following statement changes the first partition, meaning dropping partitions with lower ranges and older data.
```

```
ALTER TABLE table_name FIRST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
```

> Will drop all partitions whose value is lower than the given expression, making the matched partition the new first partition. (It will not affect a NULL PARTITION)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will drop all partitions whose value is lower than the given expression, making the matched partition the new first partition. It does not affect a NULL PARTITION.
```

> Changing the last partition, meaning adding more partitions with higher ranges/room for new data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following statement changes the last partition, meaning adding more partitions with higher ranges and room for new data.
```

```
ALTER TABLE table_name LAST PARTITION LESS THAN (<expression>)
```

> Will add new partitions with the current INTERVAL up to and including the given expression. (It will not work if a MAXVALUE PARTITION exists, since that would need data reorganisation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will add new partitions with the current INTERVAL up to and including the given expression. It does not work if a `MAXVALUE PARTITION` exists, because it needs data reorganisation.
```

#### INTERVAL Partitioning details and limitations

> - The INTERVAL partitioning feature is CREATE/ALTER TABLE syntax only, no change in metadata, so tables created or altered with the new syntax is still MySQL compatible.
> - There are no change in output format of SHOW CREATE TABLE, to keep MySQL compatibility.
> - Also existing tables conforming to INTERVAL can use the new ALTER syntax, they do not need to be created with INTERVAL syntax.
> - For RANGE COLUMNS, only integer types, date and datetime column types are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The INTERVAL partitioning feature is CREATE/ALTER TABLE syntax only. There is no change in metadata, so tables created or altered with the new syntax is still MySQL-compatible.
- There is no change in the output format of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` to keep MySQL compatibility.
- Existing tables conforming to INTERVAL can use the new `ALTER` syntax. They do not need to be created with `INTERVAL` syntax.
- For `RANGE COLUMNS`, only integer types, date and datetime column types are supported.
```
